1Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, a called apostle, having been separated to the good news of God--
2which He announced before through His prophets in holy writings--
3concerning His Son, (who is come of the seed of David according to the flesh,
4who is marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of sanctification, by the rising again from the dead,) Jesus Christ our Lord;
5through whom we did receive grace and apostleship, for obedience of faith among all the nations, in behalf of his name;
6among whom are also ye, the called of Jesus Christ;
7to all who are in Rome, beloved of God, called saints; Grace to you, and peace, from God our Father, and [from] the Lord Jesus Christ!
8first, indeed, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that your faith is proclaimed in the whole world;
9for God is my witness, whom I serve in my spirit in the good news of His Son, how unceasingly I make mention of you,
10always in my prayers beseeching, if by any means now at length I shall have a prosperous journey, by the will of God, to come unto you,
11for I long to see you, that I may impart to you some spiritual gift, that ye may be established;
12and that is, that I may be comforted together among you, through the faith in one another, both yours and mine.
13And I do not wish you to be ignorant, brethren, that many times I did purpose to come unto you--and was hindered till the present time--that some fruit I might have also among you, even as also among the other nations.
14Both to Greeks and to foreigners, both to wise and to thoughtless, I am a debtor,
15so, as much as in me is, I am ready also to you who [are] in Rome to proclaim good news,
16for I am not ashamed of the good news of the Christ, for it is the power of God to salvation to every one who is believing, both to Jew first, and to Greek.
17For the righteousness of God in it is revealed from faith to faith, according as it hath been written, `And the righteous one by faith shall live,'
18for revealed is the wrath of God from heaven upon all impiety and unrighteousness of men, holding down the truth in unrighteousness.
19Because that which is known of God is manifest among them, for God did manifest [it] to them,
20for the invisible things of Him from the creation of the world, by the things made being understood, are plainly seen, both His eternal power and Godhead--to their being inexcusable;
21because, having known God they did not glorify [Him] as God, nor gave thanks, but were made vain in their reasonings, and their unintelligent heart was darkened,
22professing to be wise, they were made fools,
23and changed the glory of the incorruptible God into the likeness of an image of corruptible man, and of fowls, and of quadrupeds, and of reptiles.
24Wherefore also God did give them up, in the desires of their hearts, to uncleanness, to dishonour their bodies among themselves;
25who did change the truth of God into a falsehood, and did honour and serve the creature rather than the Creator, who is blessed to the ages. Amen.
26Because of this did God give them up to dishonourable affections, for even their females did change the natural use into that against nature;
27and in like manner also the males having left the natural use of the female, did burn in their longing toward one another; males with males working shame, and the recompense of their error that was fit, in themselves receiving.
28And, according as they did not approve of having God in knowledge, God gave them up to a disapproved mind, to do the things not seemly;
29having been filled with all unrighteousness, whoredom, wickedness, covetousness, malice; full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, evil dispositions; whisperers,
30evil-speakers, God-haters, insulting, proud, boasters, inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents,
31unintelligent, faithless, without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful;
32who the righteous judgment of God having known--that those practising such things are worthy of death--not only do them, but also have delight with those practising them.
1Therefore, thou art inexcusable, O man--every one who is judging--for in that in which thou dost judge the other, thyself thou dost condemn, for the same things thou dost practise who art judging,
2and we have known that the judgment of God is according to truth, upon those practising such things.
3And dost thou think this, O man, who art judging those who such things are practising, and art doing them, that thou shalt escape the judgment of God?
4or the riches of His goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, dost thou despise? --not knowing that the goodness of God doth lead thee to reformation!
5but, according to thy hardness and impenitent heart, thou dost treasure up to thyself wrath, in a day of wrath and of the revelation of the righteous judgment of God,
6who shall render to each according to his works;
7to those, indeed, who in continuance of a good work, do seek glory, and honour, and incorruptibility--life age-during;
8and to those contentious, and disobedient, indeed, to the truth, and obeying the unrighteousness--indignation and wrath,
9tribulation and distress, upon every soul of man that is working the evil, both of Jew first, and of Greek;
10and glory, and honour, and peace, to every one who is working the good, both to Jew first, and to Greek.
11For there is no acceptance of faces with God,
12for as many as without law did sin, without law also shall perish, and as many as did sin in law, through law shall be judged,
13for not the hearers of the law [are] righteous before God, but the doers of the law shall be declared righteous: --
14For, when nations that have not a law, by nature may do the things of the law, these not having a law--to themselves are a law;
15who do shew the work of the law written in their hearts, their conscience also witnessing with them, and between one another the thoughts accusing or else defending,
16in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men, according to my good news, through Jesus Christ.
17Lo, thou art named a Jew, and dost rest upon the law, and dost boast in God,
18and dost know the will, and dost approve the distinctions, being instructed out of the law,
19and hast confidence that thou thyself art a leader of blind ones, a light of those in darkness,
20an instructor of foolish ones, a teacher of babes, having the form of the knowledge and of the truth in the law.
21Thou, then, who art teaching another, thyself dost thou not teach?
22thou who art preaching not to steal, dost thou steal? thou who art saying not to commit adultery, dost thou commit adultery? thou who art abhorring the idols, dost thou rob temples?
23thou who in the law dost boast, through the transgression of the law God dost thou dishonour?
24for the name of God because of you is evil spoken of among the nations, according as it hath been written.
25For circumcision, indeed, doth profit, if law thou mayest practise, but if a transgressor of law thou mayest be, thy circumcision hath become uncircumcision.
26If, therefore the uncircumcision the righteousness of the law may keep, shall not his uncircumcision for circumcision be reckoned?
27and the uncircumcision, by nature, fulfilling the law, shall judge thee who, through letter and circumcision, [art] a transgressor of law.
28For he is not a Jew who is [so] outwardly, neither [is] circumcision that which is outward in flesh;
29but a Jew [is] he who is [so] inwardly, and circumcision [is] of the heart, in spirit, not in letter, of which the praise is not of men, but of God.
1What, then, [is] the superiority of the Jew? or what the profit of the circumcision?
2much in every way; for first, indeed, that they were intrusted with the oracles of God;
3for what, if certain were faithless? shall their faithlessness the faithfulness of god make useless?
4let it not be! and let God become true, and every man false, according as it hath been written, `That Thou mayest be declared righteous in Thy words, and mayest overcome in Thy being judged.'
5And, if our unrighteousness God's righteousness doth establish, what shall we say? is God unrighteous who is inflicting the wrath? (after the manner of a man I speak)
6let it not be! since how shall God judge the world?
7for if the truth of God in my falsehood did more abound to His glory, why yet am I also as a sinner judged?
8and not, as we are evil spoken of, and as certain affirm us to say--`We may do the evil things, that the good ones may come?' whose judgment is righteous.
9What, then? are we better? not at all! for we did before charge both Jews and Greeks with being all under sin,
10according as it hath been written--`There is none righteous, not even one;
11There is none who is understanding, there is none who is seeking after God.
12All did go out of the way, together they became unprofitable, there is none doing good, there is not even one.
13A sepulchre opened [is] their throat; with their tongues they used deceit; poison of asps [is] under their lips.
14Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness.
15Swift [are] their feet to shed blood.
16Ruin and misery [are] in their ways.
17And a way of peace they did not know.
18There is no fear of God before their eyes.'
19And we have known that as many things as the law saith, to those in the law it doth speak, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may come under judgment to God;
20wherefore by works of law shall no flesh be declared righteous before Him, for through law is a knowledge of sin.
21And now apart from law hath the righteousness of God been manifested, testified to by the law and the prophets,
22and the righteousness of God [is] through the faith of Jesus Christ to all, and upon all those believing, --for there is no difference,
23for all did sin, and are come short of the glory of God--
24being declared righteous freely by His grace through the redemption that [is] in Christ Jesus,
25whom God did set forth a mercy seat, through the faith in his blood, for the shewing forth of His righteousness, because of the passing over of the bygone sins in the forbearance of God--
26for the shewing forth of His righteousness in the present time, for His being righteous, and declaring him righteous who [is] of the faith of Jesus.
27Where then [is] the boasting? it was excluded; by what law? of works? no, but by a law of faith:
28therefore do we reckon a man to be declared righteous by faith, apart from works of law.
29The God of Jews only [is He], and not also of nations?
30yes, also of nations; since one [is] God who shall declare righteous the circumcision by faith, and the uncircumcision through the faith.
31Law then do we make useless through the faith? let it not be! yea, we do establish law.
1What, then, shall we say Abraham our father, to have found, according to flesh?
2for if Abraham by works was declared righteous, he hath to boast--but not before god;
3for what doth the writing say? `And Abraham did believe God, and it was reckoned to him--to righteousness;'
4and to him who is working, the reward is not reckoned of grace, but of debt;
5and to him who is not working, and is believing upon Him who is declaring righteous the impious, his faith is reckoned--to righteousness:
6even as David also doth speak of the happiness of the man to whom God doth reckon righteousness apart from works:
7`Happy they whose lawless acts were forgiven, and whose sins were covered;
8happy the man to whom the Lord may not reckon sin.'
9[Is] this happiness, then, upon the circumcision, or also upon the uncircumcision--for we say that the faith was reckoned to Abraham--to righteousness?
10how then was it reckoned? he being in circumcision, or in uncircumcision? not in circumcision, but in uncircumcision;
11and a sign he did receive of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith in the uncircumcision, for his being father of all those believing through uncircumcision, for the righteousness also being reckoned to them,
12and father of circumcision to those not of circumcision only, but who also walk in the steps of the faith, that [is] in the uncircumcision of our father Abraham.
13For not through law [is] the promise to Abraham, or to his seed, of his being heir of the world, but through the righteousness of faith;
14for if they who are of law [are] heirs, the faith hath been made void, and the promise hath been made useless;
15for the law doth work wrath; for where law is not, neither [is] transgression.
16Because of this [it is] of faith, that [it may be] according to grace, for the promise being sure to all the seed, not to that which [is] of the law only, but also to that which [is] of the faith of Abraham,
17who is father of us all (according as it hath been written--`A father of many nations I have set thee,') before Him whom he did believe--God, who is quickening the dead, and is calling the things that be not as being.
18Who, against hope in hope did believe, for his becoming father of many nations according to that spoken: `So shall thy seed be;'
19and not having been weak in the faith, he did not consider his own body, already become dead, (being about a hundred years old,) and the deadness of Sarah's womb,
20and at the promise of God did not stagger in unbelief, but was strengthened in faith, having given glory to God,
21and having been fully persuaded that what He hath promised He is able also to do:
22wherefore also it was reckoned to him to righteousness.
23And it was not written on his account alone, that it was reckoned to him,
24but also on ours, to whom it is about to be reckoned--to us believing on Him who did raise up Jesus our Lord out of the dead,
25who was delivered up because of our offences, and was raised up because of our being declared righteous.
1Having been declared righteous, then, by faith, we have peace toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
2through whom also we have the access by the faith into this grace in which we have stood, and we boast on the hope of the glory of God.
3And not only [so], but we also boast in the tribulations, knowing that the tribulation doth work endurance;
4and the endurance, experience; and the experience, hope;
5and the hope doth not make ashamed, because the love of God hath been poured forth in our hearts through the Holy Spirit that hath been given to us.
6For in our being still ailing, Christ in due time did die for the impious;
7for scarcely for a righteous man will any one die, for for the good man perhaps some one also doth dare to die;
8and God doth commend His own love to us, that, in our being still sinners, Christ did die for us;
9much more, then, having been declared righteous now in his blood, we shall be saved through him from the wrath;
10for if, being enemies, we have been reconciled to God through the death of His Son, much more, having been reconciled, we shall be saved in his life.
11And not only [so], but we are also boasting in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom now we did receive the reconciliation;
12because of this, even as through one man the sin did enter into the world, and through the sin the death; and thus to all men the death did pass through, for that all did sin;
13for till law sin was in the world: and sin is not reckoned when there is not law;
14but the death did reign from Adam till Moses, even upon those not having sinned in the likeness of Adam's transgression, who is a type of him who is coming.
15But, not as the offence so also [is] the free gift; for if by the offence of the one the many did die, much more did the grace of God, and the free gift in grace of the one man Jesus Christ, abound to the many;
16and not as through one who did sin [is] the free gift, for the judgment indeed [is] of one to condemnation, but the gift [is] of many offences to a declaration of `Righteous,'
17for if by the offence of the one the death did reign through the one, much more those, who the abundance of the grace and of the free gift of the righteousness are receiving, in life shall reign through the one--Jesus Christ.
18So, then, as through one offence to all men [it is] to condemnation, so also through one declaration of `Righteous' [it is] to all men to justification of life;
19for as through the disobedience of the one man, the many were constituted sinners: so also through the obedience of the one, shall the many be constituted righteous.
20And law came in, that the offence might abound, and where the sin did abound, the grace did overabound,
21that even as the sin did reign in the death, so also the grace may reign, through righteousness, to life age-during, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
1What, then, shall we say? shall we continue in the sin that the grace may abound?
2let it not be! we who died to the sin--how shall we still live in it?
3are ye ignorant that we, as many as were baptized to Christ Jesus, to his death were baptized?
4we were buried together, then, with him through the baptism to the death, that even as Christ was raised up out of the dead through the glory of the Father, so also we in newness of life might walk.
5For, if we have become planted together to the likeness of his death, [so] also we shall be of the rising again;
6this knowing, that our old man was crucified with [him], that the body of the sin may be made useless, for our no longer serving the sin;
7for he who hath died hath been set free from the sin.
8And if we died with Christ, we believe that we also shall live with him,
9knowing that Christ, having been raised up out of the dead, doth no more die, death over him hath no more lordship;
10for in that he died, to the sin he died once, and in that he liveth, he liveth to God;
11so also ye, reckon yourselves to be dead indeed to the sin, and living to God in Jesus Christ our Lord.
12Let not then the sin reign in your mortal body, to obey it in its desires;
13neither present ye your members instruments of unrighteousness to the sin, but present yourselves to God as living out of the dead, and your members instruments of righteousness to God;
14for sin over you shall not have lordship, for ye are not under law, but under grace.
15What then? shall we sin because we are not under law but under grace? let it not be!
16have ye not known that to whom ye present yourselves servants for obedience, servants ye are to him to whom ye obey, whether of sin to death, or of obedience to righteousness?
17and thanks to God, that ye were servants of the sin, and--were obedient from the heart to the form of teaching to which ye were delivered up;
18and having been freed from the sin, ye became servants to the righteousness.
19In the manner of men I speak, because of the weakness of your flesh, for even as ye did present your members servants to the uncleanness and to the lawlessness--to the lawlessness, so now present your members servants to the righteousness--tosanctification,
20for when ye were servants of the sin, ye were free from the righteousness,
21what fruit, therefore, were ye having then, in the things of which ye are now ashamed? for the end of those [is] death.
22And now, having been freed from the sin, and having become servants to God, ye have your fruit--to sanctification, and the end life age-during;
23for the wages of the sin [is] death, and the gift of God [is] life age-during in Christ Jesus our Lord.
1Are ye ignorant, brethren--for to those knowing law I speak--that the law hath lordship over the man as long as he liveth?
2for the married woman to the living husband hath been bound by law, and if the husband may die, she hath been free from the law of the husband;
3so, then, the husband being alive, an adulteress she shall be called if she may become another man's; and if the husband may die, she is free from the law, so as not to be an adulteress, having become another man's.
4So that, my brethren, ye also were made dead to the law through the body of the Christ, for your becoming another's, who out of the dead was raised up, that we might bear fruit to God;
5for when we were in the flesh, the passions of the sins, that [are] through the law, were working in our members, to bear fruit to the death;
6and now we have ceased from the law, that being dead in which we were held, so that we may serve in newness of spirit, and not in oldness of letter.
7What, then, shall we say? the law [is] sin? let it not be! but the sin I did not know except through law, for also the covetousness I had not known if the law had not said:
8`Thou shalt not covet;' and the sin having received an opportunity, through the command, did work in me all covetousness--for apart from law sin is dead.
9And I was alive apart from law once, and the command having come, the sin revived, and I died;
10and the command that [is] for life, this was found by me for death;
11for the sin, having received an opportunity, through the command, did deceive me, and through it did slay [me];
12so that the law, indeed, [is] holy, and the command holy, and righteous, and good.
13That which is good then, to me hath it become death? let it not be! but the sin, that it might appear sin, through the good, working death to me, that the sin might become exceeding sinful through the command,
14for we have known that the law is spiritual, and I am fleshly, sold by the sin;
15for that which I work, I do not acknowledge; for not what I will, this I practise, but what I hate, this I do.
16And if what I do not will, this I do, I consent to the law that [it is] good,
17and now it is no longer I that work it, but the sin dwelling in me,
18for I have known that there doth not dwell in me, that is, in my flesh, good: for to will is present with me, and to work that which is right I do not find,
19for the good that I will, I do not; but the evil that I do not will, this I practise.
20And if what I do not will, this I do, it is no longer I that work it, but the sin that is dwelling in me.
21I find, then, the law, that when I desire to do what is right, with me the evil is present,
22for I delight in the law of God according to the inward man,
23and I behold another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of the sin that [is] in my members.
24A wretched man I [am]! who shall deliver me out of the body of this death?
25I thank God--through Jesus Christ our Lord; so then, I myself indeed with the mind do serve the law of God, and with the flesh, the law of sin.
1There is, then, now no condemnation to those in Christ Jesus, who walk not according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit;
2for the law of the Spirit of the life in Christ Jesus did set me free from the law of the sin and of the death;
3for what the law was not able to do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God, His own Son having sent in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, did condemn the sin in the flesh,
4that the righteousness of the law may be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit.
5For those who are according to the flesh, the things of the flesh do mind; and those according to the Spirit, the things of the Spirit;
6for the mind of the flesh [is] death, and the mind of the Spirit--life and peace;
7because the mind of the flesh [is] enmity to God, for to the law of God it doth not subject itself,
8for neither is it able; and those who are in the flesh are not able to please God.
9And ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if indeed the Spirit of God doth dwell in you; and if any one hath not the Spirit of Christ--this one is not His;
10and if Christ [is] in you, the body, indeed, [is] dead because of sin, and the Spirit [is] life because of righteousness,
11and if the Spirit of Him who did raise up Jesus out of the dead doth dwell in you, He who did raise up the Christ out of the dead shall quicken also your dying bodies, through His Spirit dwelling in you.
12So, then, brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live according to the flesh;
13for if according to the flesh ye do live, ye are about to die; and if, by the Spirit, the deeds of the body ye put to death, ye shall live;
14for as many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are the sons of God;
15for ye did not receive a spirit of bondage again for fear, but ye did receive a spirit of adoption in which we cry, `Abba--Father.'
16The Spirit himself doth testify with our spirit, that we are children of God;
17and if children, also heirs, heirs, indeed, of God, and heirs together of Christ--if, indeed, we suffer together, that we may also be glorified together.
18For I reckon that the sufferings of the present time [are] not worthy [to be compared] with the glory about to be revealed in us;
19for the earnest looking out of the creation doth expect the revelation of the sons of God;
20for to vanity was the creation made subject--not of its will, but because of Him who did subject [it] --in hope,
21that also the creation itself shall be set free from the servitude of the corruption to the liberty of the glory of the children of God;
22for we have known that all the creation doth groan together, and doth travail in pain together till now.
23And not only [so], but also we ourselves, having the first-fruit of the Spirit, we also ourselves in ourselves do groan, adoption expecting--the redemption of our body;
24for in hope we were saved, and hope beheld is not hope; for what any one doth behold, why also doth he hope for [it]?
25and if what we do not behold we hope for, through continuance we expect [it].
26And, in like manner also, the Spirit doth help our weaknesses; for, what we may pray for, as it behoveth [us], we have not known, but the Spirit himself doth make intercession for us with groanings unutterable,
27and He who is searching the hearts hath known what [is] the mind of the Spirit, because according to God he doth intercede for saints.
28And we have known that to those loving God all things do work together for good, to those who are called according to purpose;
29because whom He did foreknow, He also did fore-appoint, conformed to the image of His Son, that he might be first-born among many brethren;
30and whom He did fore-appoint, these also He did call; and whom He did call, these also He declared righteous; and whom He declared righteous, these also He did glorify.
31What, then, shall we say unto these things? if God [is] for us, who [is] against us?
32He who indeed His own Son did not spare, but for us all did deliver him up, how shall He not also with him the all things grant to us?
33Who shall lay a charge against the choice ones of God? God [is] He that is declaring righteous,
34who [is] he that is condemning? Christ [is] He that died, yea, rather also, was raised up; who is also on the right hand of God--who also doth intercede for us.
35Who shall separate us from the love of the Christ? tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword?
36(according as it hath been written--`For Thy sake we are put to death all the day long, we were reckoned as sheep of slaughter,')
37but in all these we more than conquer, through him who loved us;
38for I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor messengers, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present,
39nor things about to be, nor height, nor depth, nor any other created thing, shall be able to separate us from the love of god, that [is] in Christ Jesus our Lord.
1Truth I say in Christ, I lie not, my conscience bearing testimony with me in the Holy Spirit,
2that I have great grief and unceasing pain in my heart--
3for I was wishing, I myself, to be anathema from the Christ--for my brethren, my kindred, according to the flesh,
4who are Israelites, whose [is] the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the lawgiving, and the service, and the promises,
5whose [are] the fathers, and of whom [is] the Christ, according to the flesh, who is over all, God blessed to the ages. Amen.
6And it is not possible that the word of God hath failed; for not all who [are] of Israel are these Israel;
7nor because they are seed of Abraham [are] all children, but--`in Isaac shall a seed be called to thee;'
8that is, the children of the flesh--these [are] not children of God; but the children of the promise are reckoned for seed;
9for the word of promise [is] this; `According to this time I will come, and there shall be to Sarah a son.'
10And not only [so], but also Rebecca, having conceived by one--Isaac our father--
11(for they being not yet born, neither having done anything good or evil, that the purpose of God, according to choice, might remain; not of works, but of Him who is calling,) it was said to her--
12`The greater shall serve the less;'
13according as it hath been written, `Jacob I did love, and Esau I did hate.'
14What, then, shall we say? unrighteousness [is] with God? let it not be!
15for to Moses He saith, `I will do kindness to whom I do kindness, and I will have compassion on whom I have compassion;'
16so, then--not of him who is willing, nor of him who is running, but of God who is doing kindness:
17for the Writing saith to Pharaoh--`For this very thing I did raise thee up, that I might shew in thee My power, and that My name might be declared in all the land;'
18so, then, to whom He willeth, He doth kindness, and to whom He willeth, He doth harden.
19Thou wilt say, then, to me, `Why yet doth He find fault? for His counsel who hath resisted?'
20nay, but, O man, who art thou that art answering again to God? shall the thing formed say to Him who did form [it], Why me didst thou make thus?
21hath not the potter authority over the clay, out of the same lump to make the one vessel to honour, and the one to dishonour?
22And if God, willing to shew the wrath and to make known His power, did endure, in much long suffering, vessels of wrath fitted for destruction,
23and that He might make known the riches of His glory on vessels of kindness, that He before prepared for glory, whom also He did call--us--
24not only out of Jews, but also out of nations,
25as also in Hosea He saith, `I will call what [is] not My people--My people; and her not beloved--Beloved,
26and it shall be--in the place where it was said to them, Ye [are] not My people; there they shall be called sons of the living God.'
27And Isaiah doth cry concerning Israel, `If the number of the sons of Israel may be as the sand of the sea, the remnant shall be saved;
28for a matter He is finishing, and is cutting short in righteousness, because a matter cut short will the Lord do upon the land.
29and according as Isaiah saith before, `Except the Lord of Sabaoth did leave to us a seed, as Sodom we had become, and as Gomorrah we had been made like.'
30What, then, shall we say? that nations who are not pursuing righteousness did attain to righteousness, and righteousness that [is] of faith,
31and Israel, pursuing a law of righteousness, at a law of righteousness did not arrive;
32wherefore? because--not by faith, but as by works of law; for they did stumble at the stone of stumbling,
33according as it hath been written, `Lo, I place in Sion a stone of stumbling and a rock of offence; and every one who is believing thereon shall not be ashamed.'
1Brethren, the pleasure indeed of my heart, and my supplication that [is] to God for Israel, is--for salvation;
2for I bear them testimony that they have a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge,
3for not knowing the righteousness of God, and their own righteousness seeking to establish, to the righteousness of God they did not submit.
4For Christ is an end of law for righteousness to every one who is believing,
5for Moses doth describe the righteousness that [is] of the law, that, `The man who did them shall live in them,'
6and the righteousness of faith doth thus speak: `Thou mayest not say in thine heart, Who shall go up to the heaven,' that is, Christ to bring down?
7or, `Who shall go down to the abyss,' that is, Christ out of the dead to bring up.
8But what doth it say? `Nigh thee is the saying--in thy mouth, and in thy heart:' that is, the saying of the faith, that we preach;
9that if thou mayest confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and mayest believe in thy heart that God did raise him out of the dead, thou shalt be saved,
10for with the heart doth [one] believe to righteousness, and with the mouth is confession made to salvation;
11for the Writing saith, `Every one who is believing on him shall not be ashamed,'
12for there is no difference between Jew and Greek, for the same Lord of all [is] rich to all those calling upon Him,
13for every one--whoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, he shall be saved.'
14How then shall they call upon [him] in whom they did not believe? and how shall they believe [on him] of whom they did not hear? and how shall they hear apart from one preaching?
15and how shall they preach, if they may not be sent? according as it hath been written, `How beautiful the feet of those proclaiming good tidings of peace, of those proclaiming good tidings of the good things!'
16But they were not all obedient to the good tidings, for Isaiah saith, `Lord, who did give credence to our report?'
17so then the faith [is] by a report, and the report through a saying of God,
18but I say, Did they not hear? yes, indeed--`to all the earth their voice went forth, and to the ends of the habitable world their sayings.'
19But I say, Did not Israel know? first Moses saith, `I will provoke you to jealousy by [that which is] not a nation; by an unintelligent nation I will anger you,'
20and Isaiah is very bold, and saith, `I was found by those not seeking Me; I became manifest to those not inquiring after Me;'
21and unto Israel He saith, `All the day I did stretch out My hands unto a people unbelieving and gainsaying.'
1I say, then, Did God cast away His people? let it not be! for I also am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin:
2God did not cast away His people whom He knew before; have ye not known--in Elijah--what the Writing saith? how he doth plead with God concerning Israel, saying,
3`Lord, Thy prophets they did kill, and Thy altars they dug down, and I was left alone, and they seek my life;'
4but what saith the divine answer to him? `I left to Myself seven thousand men, who did not bow a knee to Baal.'
5So then also in the present time a remnant according to the choice of grace there hath been;
6and if by grace, no more of works, otherwise the grace becometh no more grace; and if of works, it is no more grace, otherwise the work is no more work.
7What then? What Israel doth seek after, this it did not obtain, and the chosen did obtain, and the rest were hardened,
8according as it hath been written, `God gave to them a spirit of deep sleep, eyes not to see, and ears not to hear,' --unto this very day,
9and David saith, `Let their table become for a snare, and for a trap, and for a stumbling-block, and for a recompense to them;
10let their eyes be darkened--not to behold, and their back do Thou always bow down.'
11I say, then, Did they stumble that they might fall? let it not be! but by their fall the salvation [is] to the nations, to arouse them to jealousy;
12and if the fall of them [is] the riches of a world, and the diminution of them the riches of nations, how much more the fulness of them?
13For to you I speak--to the nations--inasmuch as I am indeed an apostle of nations, my ministration I do glorify;
14if by any means I shall arouse to jealousy mine own flesh, and shall save some of them,
15for if the casting away of them [is] a reconciliation of the world, what the reception- -if not life out of the dead?
16and if the first-fruit [is] holy, the lump also; and if the root [is] holy, the branches also.
17And if certain of the branches were broken off, and thou, being a wild olive tree, wast graffed in among them, and a fellow-partaker of the root and of the fatness of the olive tree didst become--
18do not boast against the branches; and if thou dost boast, thou dost not bear the root, but the root thee!
19Thou wilt say, then, `The branches were broken off, that I might be graffed in;' right!
20by unbelief they were broken off, and thou hast stood by faith; be not high-minded, but be fearing;
21for if God the natural branches did not spare--lest perhaps He also shall not spare thee.
22Lo, then, goodness and severity of God--upon those indeed who fell, severity; and upon thee, goodness, if thou mayest remain in the goodness, otherwise, thou also shalt be cut off.
23And those also, if they may not remain in unbelief, shall be graffed in, for God is able again to graff them in;
24for if thou, out of the olive tree, wild by nature, wast cut out, and, contrary to nature, wast graffed into a good olive tree, how much rather shall they, who [are] according to nature, be graffed into their own olive tree?
25For I do not wish you to be ignorant, brethren, of this secret--that ye may not be wise in your own conceits--that hardness in part to Israel hath happened till the fulness of the nations may come in;
26and so all Israel shall be saved, according as it hath been written, `There shall come forth out of Sion he who is delivering, and he shall turn away impiety from Jacob,
27and this to them [is] the covenant from Me, when I may take away their sins.'
28As regards, indeed, the good tidings, [they are] enemies on your account; and as regards the choice--beloved on account of the fathers;
29for unrepented of [are] the gifts and the calling of God;
30for as ye also once did not believe in God, and now did find kindness by the unbelief of these:
31so also these now did not believe, that in your kindness they also may find kindness;
32for God did shut up together the whole to unbelief, that to the whole He might do kindness.
33O depth of riches, and wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable His judgments, and untraceable His ways!
34for who did know the mind of the Lord? or who did become His counsellor?
35or who did first give to Him, and it shall be given back to him again?
36because of Him, and through Him, and to Him [are] the all things; to Him [is] the glory--to the ages. Amen.
1I call upon you, therefore, brethren, through the compassions of God, to present your bodies a sacrifice--living, sanctified, acceptable to God--your intelligent service;
2and be not conformed to this age, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind, for your proving what [is] the will of God--the good, and acceptable, and perfect.
3For I say, through the grace that was given to me, to every one who is among you, not to think above what it behoveth to think; but to think so as to think wisely, as to each God did deal a measure of faith,
4for as in one body we have many members, and all the members have not the same office,
5so we, the many, one body are in Christ, and members each one of one another.
6And having gifts, different according to the grace that was given to us; whether prophecy--`According to the proportion of faith!'
7or ministration--`In the ministration!' or he who is teaching--`In the teaching!'
8or he who is exhorting--`In the exhortation!' he who is sharing--`In simplicity!' he who is leading--`In diligence?' he who is doing kindness--`In cheerfulness.'
9The love unfeigned: abhorring the evil; cleaving to the good;
10in the love of brethren, to one another kindly affectioned: in the honour going before one another;
11in the diligence not slothful; in the spirit fervent; the Lord serving;
12in the hope rejoicing; in the tribulation enduring; in the prayer persevering;
13to the necessities of the saints communicating; the hospitality pursuing.
14Bless those persecuting you; bless, and curse not;
15to rejoice with the rejoicing, and to weep with the weeping,
16of the same mind one toward another, not minding the high things, but with the lowly going along; become not wise in your own conceit;
17giving back to no one evil for evil; providing right things before all men.
18If possible--so far as in you--with all men being in peace;
19not avenging yourselves, beloved, but give place to the wrath, for it hath been written, `Vengeance [is] Mine,
20I will recompense again, saith the Lord;' if, then, thine enemy doth hunger, feed him; if he doth thirst, give him drink; for this doing, coals of fire thou shalt heap upon his head;
21Be not overcome by the evil, but overcome, in the good, the evil.
1Let every soul to the higher authorities be subject, for there is no authority except from God, and the authorities existing are appointed by God,
2so that he who is setting himself against the authority, against God's ordinance hath resisted; and those resisting, to themselves shall receive judgment.
3For those ruling are not a terror to the good works, but to the evil; and dost thou wish not to be afraid of the authority? that which is good be doing, and thou shalt have praise from it,
4for of God it is a ministrant to thee for good; and if that which is evil thou mayest do, be fearing, for not in vain doth it bear the sword; for of God it is a ministrant, an avenger for wrath to him who is doing that which is evil.
5Wherefore it is necessary to be subject, not only because of the wrath, but also because of the conscience,
6for because of this also pay ye tribute; for servants of God they are, on this very thing attending continually;
7render, therefore, to all [their] dues; to whom tribute, the tribute; to whom custom, the custom; to whom fear, the fear; to whom honour, the honour.
8To no one owe anything, except to love one another; for he who is loving the other-- law he hath fulfilled,
9for, `Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt do no murder, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false testimony, Thou shalt not covet;' and if there is any other command, in this word it is summed up, in this: `Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself;'
10the love to the neighbour doth work no ill; the love, therefore, [is] the fulness of law.
11And this, knowing the time, that for us, the hour already [is] to be aroused out of sleep, for now nearer [is] our salvation than when we did believe;
12the night did advance, and the day came nigh; let us lay aside, therefore, the works of the darkness, and let us put on the armour of the light;
13as in day-time, let us walk becomingly; not in revellings and drunkennesses, not in chamberings and lasciviousnesses, not in strife and emulation;
14but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and for the flesh take no forethought--for desires.
1And him who is weak in the faith receive ye--not to determinations of reasonings;
2one doth believe that he may eat all things--and he who is weak doth eat herbs;
3let not him who is eating despise him who is not eating: and let not him who is not eating judge him who is eating, for God did receive him.
4Thou--who art thou that art judging another's domestic? to his own master he doth stand or fall; and he shall be made to stand, for God is able to make him stand.
5One doth judge one day above another, and another doth judge every day [alike]; let each in his own mind be fully assured.
6He who is regarding the day, to the Lord he doth regard [it], and he who is not regarding the day, to the Lord he doth not regard [it]. He who is eating, to the Lord he doth eat, for he doth give thanks to God; and he who is not eating, to the Lord he doth not eat, and doth give thanks to God.
7For none of us to himself doth live, and none to himself doth die;
8for both, if we may live, to the Lord we live; if also we may die, to the Lord we die; both then if we may live, also if we may die, we are the Lord's;
9for because of this Christ both died and rose again, and lived again, that both of dead and of living he may be Lord.
10And thou, why dost thou judge thy brother? or again, thou, why dost thou set at nought thy brother? for we shall all stand at the tribunal of the Christ;
11for it hath been written, `I live! saith the Lord--to Me bow shall every knee, and every tongue shall confess to God;'
12so, then, each of us concerning himself shall give reckoning to God;
13no longer, therefore, may we judge one another, but this judge ye rather, not to put a stumbling-stone before the brother, or an offence.
14I have known, and am persuaded, in the Lord Jesus, that nothing [is] unclean of itself, except to him who is reckoning anything to be unclean--to that one [it is] unclean;
15and if through victuals thy brother is grieved, no more dost thou walk according to love; do not with thy victuals destroy that one for whom Christ died.
16Let not, then, your good be evil spoken of,
17for the reign of God is not eating and drinking, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit;
18for he who in these things is serving the Christ, [is] acceptable to God and approved of men.
19So, then, the things of peace may we pursue, and the things of building up one another;
20for the sake of victuals cast not down the work of God; all things, indeed, [are] pure, but evil [is] to the man who is eating through stumbling.
21Right [it is] not to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor to [do anything] in which thy brother doth stumble, or is made to fall, or is weak.
22Thou hast faith! to thyself have [it] before God; happy is he who is not judging himself in what he doth approve,
23and he who is making a difference, if he may eat, hath been condemned, because [it is] not of faith; and all that [is] not of faith is sin.
1And we ought--we who are strong--to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves;
2for let each one of us please the neighbour for good, unto edification,
3for even the Christ did not please himself, but, according as it hath been written, `The reproaches of those reproaching Thee fell upon me;'
4for, as many things as were written before, for our instruction were written before, that through the endurance, and the exhortation of the Writings, we might have the hope.
5And may the God of the endurance, and of the exhortation, give to you to have the same mind toward one another, according to Christ Jesus;
6that with one accord--with one mouth--ye may glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ;
7wherefore receive ye one another, according as also the Christ did receive us, to the glory of God.
8And I say Jesus Christ to have become a ministrant of circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm the promises to the fathers,
9and the nations for kindness to glorify God, according as it hath been written, `Because of this I will confess to Thee among nations, and to Thy name I will sing praise,'
10and again it saith, `Rejoice ye nations, with His people;'
11and again, `Praise the Lord, all ye nations; and laud Him, all ye peoples;'
12and again, Isaiah saith, `There shall be the root of Jesse, and he who is rising to rule nations--upon him shall nations hope;'
13and the God of the hope shall fill you with all joy and peace in the believing, for your abounding in the hope in power of the Holy Spirit.
14And I am persuaded, my brethren--I myself also--concerning you, that ye yourselves also are full of goodness, having been filled with all knowledge, able also one another to admonish;
15and the more boldly I did write to you, brethren, in part, as putting you in mind, because of the grace that is given to me by God,
16for my being a servant of Jesus Christ to the nations, acting as priest in the good news of God, that the offering up of the nations may become acceptable, sanctified by the Holy Spirit.
17I have, then, a boasting in Christ Jesus, in the things pertaining to God,
18for I will not dare to speak anything of the things that Christ did not work through me, to obedience of nations, by word and deed,
19in power of signs and wonders, in power of the Spirit of God; so that I, from Jerusalem, and in a circle as far as Illyricum, have fully preached the good news of the Christ;
20and so counting it honour to proclaim good news, not where Christ was named--that upon another's foundation I might not build--
21but according as it hath been written, `To whom it was not told concerning him, they shall see; and they who have not heard, shall understand.'
22Wherefore, also, I was hindered many times from coming unto you,
23and now, no longer having place in these parts, and having a longing to come unto you for many years,
24when I may go on to Spain I will come unto you, for I hope in going through, to see you, and by you to be set forward thither, if of you first, in part, I shall be filled.
25And, now, I go on to Jerusalem, ministering to the saints;
26for it pleased Macedonia and Achaia well to make a certain contribution for the poor of the saints who [are] in Jerusalem;
27for it pleased well, and their debtors they are, for if in their spiritual things the nations did participate, they ought also, in the fleshly things, to minister to them.
28This, then, having finished, and having sealed to them this fruit, I will return through you, to Spain;
29and I have known that coming unto you--in the fulness of the blessing of the good news of Christ I shall come.
30And I call upon you, brethren, through our Lord Jesus Christ, and through the love of the Spirit, to strive together with me in the prayers for me unto God,
31that I may be delivered from those not believing in Judea, and that my ministration, that [is] for Jerusalem, may become acceptable to the saints;
32that in joy I may come unto you, through the will of God, and may be refreshed with you,
33and the God of the peace [be] with you all. Amen.
1And I commend you to Phebe our sister--being a ministrant of the assembly that [is] in Cenchrea--
2that ye may receive her in the Lord, as doth become saints, and may assist her in whatever matter she may have need of you--for she also became a leader of many, and of myself.
3Salute Priscilla and Aquilas, my fellow-workmen in Christ Jesus--
4who for my life their own neck did lay down, to whom not only I give thanks, but also all the assemblies of the nations--
5and the assembly at their house; salute Epaenetus, my beloved, who is first-fruit of Achaia to Christ.
6Salute Mary, who did labour much for us;
7salute Andronicus and Junias, my kindred, and my fellow-captives, who are of note among the apostles, who also have been in Christ before me.
8Salute Amplias, my beloved in the Lord;
9salute Arbanus, our fellow-workman in Christ, and Stachys, my beloved;
10salute Apelles, the approved in Christ; salute those of the [household] of Aristobulus;
11salute Herodion, my kinsman; salute those of the [household] of Narcissus, who are in the Lord;
12salute Tryphaena, and Tryphosa, who are labouring in the Lord; salute Persis, the beloved, who did labour much in the Lord.
13Salute Rufus, the choice one in the Lord, and his mother and mine,
14salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas, Patrobas, Hermes, and the brethren with them;
15salute Philologus, and Julias, Nereus, and his sister, and Olympas, and all the saints with them;
16salute one another in a holy kiss; the assemblies of Christ do salute you.
17And I call upon you, brethren, to mark those who the divisions and the stumblingblocks, contrary to the teaching that ye did learn, are causing, and turn ye away from them;
18for such our Lord Jesus Christ do not serve, but their own belly; and through the good word and fair speech they deceive the hearts of the harmless,
19for your obedience did reach to all; I rejoice, therefore, as regards you, and I wish you to be wise, indeed, as to the good, and harmless as to the evil;
20and the God of the peace shall bruise the Adversary under your feet quickly; the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ [be] with you. Amen!
21Salute you do Timotheus, my fellow-workman, and Lucius, and Jason, and Sosipater, my kindred;
22I Tertius salute you (who wrote the letter) in the Lord;
23salute you doth Gaius, my host, and of the whole assembly; salute you doth Erastus, the steward of the city, and Quartus the brother,
24the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ [be] with you all. Amen.
25And to Him who is able to establish you, according to my good news, and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the secret, in the times of the ages having been kept silent,
26and now having been made manifest, also, through prophetic writings, according to a command of the age-during God, having been made known to all the nations for obedience of faith--
27to the only wise God, through Jesus Christ, to him [be] glory to the ages. Amen.
1Paul, a called apostle of Jesus Christ, through the will of God, and Sosthenes the brother,
2to the assembly of God that is in Corinth, to those sanctified in Christ Jesus, called saints, with all those calling upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ in every place--both theirs and ours:
3Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ!
4I give thanks to my God always concerning you for the grace of God that was given to you in Christ Jesus,
5that in every thing ye were enriched in him, in all discourse and all knowledge,
6according as the testimony of the Christ was confirmed in you,
7so that ye are not behind in any gift, waiting for the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ,
8who also shall confirm you unto the end--unblamable in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ;
9faithful [is] God, through whom ye were called to the fellowship of His Son Jesus Christ our Lord.
10And I call upon you, brethren, through the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that the same thing ye may all say, and there may not be divisions among you, and ye may be perfected in the same mind, and in the same judgment,
11for it was signified to me concerning you, my brethren, by those of Chloe, that contentions are among you;
12and I say this, that each one of you saith, `I, indeed, am of Paul' --`and I of Apollos,' --`and I of Cephas,' --`and I of Christ.'
13Hath the Christ been divided? was Paul crucified for you? or to the name of Paul were ye baptized;
14I give thanks to God that no one of you did I baptize, except Crispus and Gaius--
15that no one may say that to my own name I did baptize;
16and I did baptize also Stephanas' household--further, I have not known if I did baptize any other.
17For Christ did not send me to baptize, but--to proclaim good news; not in wisdom of discourse, that the cross of the Christ may not be made of none effect;
18for the word of the cross to those indeed perishing is foolishness, and to us-- those being saved--it is the power of God,
19for it hath been written, `I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and the intelligence of the intelligent I will bring to nought;'
20where [is] the wise? where the scribe? where a disputer of this age? did not God make foolish the wisdom of this world?
21for, seeing in the wisdom of God the world through the wisdom knew not God, it did please God through the foolishness of the preaching to save those believing.
22Since also Jews ask a sign, and Greeks seek wisdom,
23also we--we preach Christ crucified, to Jews, indeed, a stumbling-block, and to Greeks foolishness,
24and to those called--both Jews and Greeks--Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God,
25because the foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the weakness of God is stronger than men;
26for see your calling, brethren, that not many [are] wise according to the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble;
27but the foolish things of the world did God choose, that the wise He may put to shame; and the weak things of the world did God choose that He may put to shame the strong;
28and the base things of the world, and the things despised did God choose, and the things that are not, that the things that are He may make useless--
29that no flesh may glory before Him;
30and of Him ye--ye are in Christ Jesus, who became to us from God wisdom, righteousness also, and sanctification, and redemption,
31that, according as it hath been written, `He who is glorying--in the Lord let him glory.'
1And I, having come unto you, brethren, came--not in superiority of discourse or wisdom--declaring to you the testimony of God,
2for I decided not to know any thing among you, except Jesus Christ, and him crucified;
3and I, in weakness, and in fear, and in much trembling, was with you;
4and my word and my preaching was not in persuasive words of human wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power--
5that your faith may not be in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God.
6And wisdom we speak among the perfect, and wisdom not of this age, nor of the rulers of this age--of those becoming useless,
7but we speak the hidden wisdom of God in a secret, that God foreordained before the ages to our glory,
8which no one of the rulers of this age did know, for if they had known, the Lord of the glory they would not have crucified;
9but, according as it hath been written, `What eye did not see, and ear did not hear, and upon the heart of man came not up, what God did prepare for those loving Him--'
10but to us did God reveal [them] through His Spirit, for the Spirit all things doth search, even the depths of God,
11for who of men hath known the things of the man, except the spirit of the man that [is] in him? so also the things of God no one hath known, except the Spirit of God.
12And we the spirit of the world did not receive, but the Spirit that [is] of God, that we may know the things conferred by God on us,
13which things also we speak, not in words taught by human wisdom, but in those taught by the Holy Spirit, with spiritual things spiritual things comparing,
14and the natural man doth not receive the things of the Spirit of God, for to him they are foolishness, and he is not able to know [them], because spiritually they are discerned;
15and he who is spiritual, doth discern indeed all things, and he himself is by no one discerned;
16for who did know the mind of the Lord that he shall instruct Him? and we--we have the mind of Christ.
1And I, brethren, was not able to speak to you as to spiritual, but as to fleshly--as to babes in Christ;
2with milk I fed you, and not with meat, for ye were not yet able, but not even yet are ye now able,
3for yet ye are fleshly, for where [there is] among you envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not fleshly, and in the manner of men do walk?
4for when one may say, `I, indeed, am of Paul;' and another, `I--of Apollos;' are ye not fleshly?
5Who, then, is Paul, and who Apollos, but ministrants through whom ye did believe, and to each as the Lord gave?
6I planted, Apollos watered, but God was giving growth;
7so that neither is he who is planting anything, nor he who is watering, but He who is giving growth--God;
8and he who is planting and he who is watering are one, and each his own reward shall receive, according to his own labour,
9for of God we are fellow-workmen; God's tillage, God's building ye are.
10According to the grace of God that was given to me, as a wise master-builder, a foundation I have laid, and another doth build on [it],
11for other foundation no one is able to lay except that which is laid, which is Jesus the Christ;
12and if any one doth build upon this foundation gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, straw--
13of each the work shall become manifest, for the day shall declare [it], because in fire it is revealed, and the work of each, what kind it is, the fire shall prove;
14if of any one the work doth remain that he built on [it], a wage he shall receive;
15if of any the work is burned up, he shall suffer loss; and himself shall be saved, but so as through fire.
16have ye not known that ye are a sanctuary of God, and the Spirit of God doth dwell in you?
17if any one the sanctuary of God doth waste, him shall God waste; for the sanctuary of God is holy, the which ye are.
18Let no one deceive himself; if any one doth seem to be wise among you in this age--let him become a fool, that he may become wise,
19for the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God, for it hath been written, `Who is taking the wise in their craftiness;'
20and again, `The Lord doth know the reasonings of the wise, that they are vain.'
21So then, let no one glory in men, for all things are yours,
22whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things about to be--all are yours,
23and ye [are] Christ's, and Christ [is] God's.
1Let a man so reckon us as officers of Christ, and stewards of the secrets of God,
2and as to the rest, it is required in the stewards that one may be found faithful,
3and to me it is for a very little thing that by you I may be judged, or by man's day, but not even myself do I judge,
4for of nothing to myself have I been conscious, but not in this have I been declared right--and he who is discerning me is the Lord:
5so, then, nothing before the time judge ye, till the Lord may come, who will both bring to light the hidden things of the darkness, and will manifest the counsels of the hearts, and then the praise shall come to each from God.
6And these things, brethren, I did transfer to myself and to Apollos because of you, that in us ye may learn not to think above that which hath been written, that ye may not be puffed up one for one against the other,
7for who doth make thee to differ? and what hast thou, that thou didst not receive? and if thou didst also receive, why dost thou glory as not having received?
8Already ye are having been filled, already ye were rich, apart from us ye did reign, and I would also ye did reign, that we also with you may reign together,
9for I think that God did set forth us the apostles last--as appointed to death, because a spectacle we became to the world, and messengers, and men;
10we [are] fools because of Christ, and ye wise in Christ; we [are] ailing, and ye strong; ye glorious, and we dishonoured;
11unto the present hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and wander about,
12and labour, working with [our] own hands; being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer;
13being spoken evil of, we entreat; as filth of the world we did become--of all things an offscouring--till now.
14Not [as] putting you to shame do I write these things, but as my beloved children I do admonish,
15for if a myriad of child-conductors ye may have in Christ, yet not many fathers; for in Christ Jesus, through the good news, I--I did beget you;
16I call upon you, therefore, become ye followers of me;
17because of this I sent to you Timotheus, who is my child, beloved and faithful in the Lord, who shall remind you of my ways in Christ, according as everywhere in every assembly I teach.
18And as if I were not coming unto you certain were puffed up;
19but I will come quickly unto you, if the Lord may will, and I will know not the word of those puffed up, but the power;
20for not in word is the reign of God, but in power?
21what do ye wish? with a rod shall I come unto you, or in love, with a spirit also of meekness?
1Whoredom is actually heard of among you, and such whoredom as is not even named among the nations--as that one hath the wife of the father! --
2and ye are having been puffed up, and did not rather mourn, that he may be removed out of the midst of you who did this work,
3for I indeed, as being absent as to the body, and present as to the spirit, have already judged, as being present, him who so wrought this thing:
4in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ--ye being gathered together, also my spirit- -with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ,
5to deliver up such a one to the Adversary for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.
6Not good [is] your glorying; have ye not known that a little leaven the whole lump doth leaven?
7cleanse out, therefore, the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, according as ye are unleavened, for also our passover for us was sacrificed--Christ,
8so that we may keep the feast, not with old leaven, nor with the leaven of evil and wickedness, but with unleavened food of sincerity and truth.
9I did write to you in the epistle, not to keep company with whoremongers--
10and not certainly with the whoremongers of this world, or with the covetous, or extortioners, or idolaters, seeing ye ought then to go forth out of the world--
11and now, I did write to you not to keep company with [him], if any one, being named a brother, may be a whoremonger, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner--with such a one not even to eat together;
12for what have I also those without to judge? those within do ye not judge?
13and those without God doth judge; and put ye away the evil from among yourselves.
1Dare any one of you, having a matter with the other, go to be judged before the unrighteous, and not before the saints?
2have ye not known that the saints shall judge the world? and if by you the world is judged, are ye unworthy of the smaller judgments?
3have ye not known that we shall judge messengers? why not then the things of life?
4of the things of life, indeed, then, if ye may have judgment, those despised in the assembly--these cause ye to sit;
5unto your shame I speak: so there is not among you one wise man, not even one, who shall be able to discern in the midst of his brethren!
6but brother with brother doth go to be judged, and this before unbelievers!
7Already, indeed, then, there is altogether a fault among you, that ye have judgments with one another; wherefore do ye not rather suffer injustice? wherefore be ye not rather defrauded?
8but ye--ye do injustice, and ye defraud, and these--brethren!
9have ye not known that the unrighteous the reign of God shall not inherit? be not led astray; neither whoremongers, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor sodomites,
10nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, the reign of God shall inherit.
11And certain of you were these! but ye were washed, but ye were sanctified, but ye were declared righteous, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and in the Spirit of our God.
12All things are lawful to me, but all things are not profitable; all things are lawful to me, but I--I will not be under authority by any;
13the meats [are] for the belly, and the belly for the meats. And God both this and these shall make useless; and the body [is] not for whoredom, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body;
14and God both the Lord did raise, and us will raise up through His power.
15Have ye not known that your bodies are members of Christ? having taken, then, the members of the Christ, shall I make [them] members of an harlot? let it be not!
16have ye not known that he who is joined to the harlot is one body? `for they shall be--saith He--the two for one flesh.'
17And he who is joined to the Lord is one spirit;
18flee the whoredom; every sin--whatever a man may commit--is without the body, and he who is committing whoredom, against his own body doth sin.
19Have ye not known that your body is a sanctuary of the Holy Spirit in you, which ye have from God? and ye are not your own,
20for ye were bought with a price; glorify, then, God in your body and in your spirit, which are God's.
1And concerning the things of which ye wrote to me: good [it is] for a man not to touch a woman,
2and because of the whoredom let each man have his own wife, and let each woman have her proper husband;
3to the wife let the husband the due benevolence render, and in like manner also the wife to the husband;
4the wife over her own body hath not authority, but the husband; and, in like manner also, the husband over his own body hath not authority, but the wife.
5Defraud not one another, except by consent for a time, that ye may be free for fasting and prayer, and again may come together, that the Adversary may not tempt you because of your incontinence;
6and this I say by way of concurrence--not of command,
7for I wish all men to be even as I myself [am]; but each his own gift hath of God, one indeed thus, and one thus.
8And I say to the unmarried and to the widows: it is good for them if they may remain even as I [am];
9and if they have not continence--let them marry, for it is better to marry than to burn;
10and to the married I announce--not I, but the Lord--let not a wife separate from a husband:
11but and if she may separate, let her remain unmarried, or to the husband let her be reconciled, and let not a husband send away a wife.
12And to the rest I speak--not the Lord--if any brother hath a wife unbelieving, and she is pleased to dwell with him, let him not send her away;
13and a woman who hath a husband unbelieving, and he is pleased to dwell with her, let her not send him away;
14for the unbelieving husband hath been sanctified in the wife, and the unbelieving wife hath been sanctified in the husband; otherwise your children are unclean, but now they are holy.
15And, if the unbelieving doth separate himself--let him separate himself: the brother or the sister is not under servitude in such [cases], and in peace hath God called us;
16for what, hast thou known, O wife, whether the husband thou shalt save? or what, hast thou known, O husband, whether the wife thou shalt save?
17if not, as God did distribute to each, as the Lord hath called each--so let him walk; and thus in all the assemblies do I direct:
18being circumcised--was any one called? let him not become uncircumcised; in uncircumcision was any one called? let him not be circumcised;
19the circumcision is nothing, and the uncircumcision is nothing--but a keeping of the commands of God.
20Each in the calling in which he was called--in this let him remain;
21a servant--wast thou called? be not anxious; but if also thou art able to become free--use [it] rather;
22for he who [is] in the Lord--having been called a servant--is the Lord's freedman: in like manner also he the freeman, having been called, is servant of Christ:
23with a price ye were bought, become not servants of men;
24each, in that in which he was called, brethren, in this let him remain with God.
25And concerning the virgins, a command of the Lord I have not; and I give judgment as having obtained kindness from the Lord to be faithful:
26I suppose, therefore, this to be good because of the present necessity, that [it is] good for a man that the matter be thus: --
27Hast thou been bound to a wife? seek not to be loosed; hast thou been loosed from a wife? seek not a wife.
28But and if thou mayest marry, thou didst not sin; and if the virgin may marry, she did not sin; and such shall have tribulation in the flesh: and I spare you.
29And this I say, brethren, the time henceforth is having been shortened--that both those having wives may be as not having;
30and those weeping, as not weeping; and those rejoicing, as not rejoicing; and those buying, as not possessing;
31and those using this world, as not using [it] up; for passing away is the fashion of this world.
32And I wish you to be without anxiety; the unmarried is anxious for the things of the Lord, how he shall please the Lord;
33and the married is anxious for the things of the world, how he shall please the wife.
34The wife and the virgin have been distinguished: the unmarried is anxious for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body and in spirit, and the married is anxious for the things of the world, how she shall please the husband.
35And this for your own profit I say: not that I may cast a noose upon you, but for the seemliness and devotedness to the Lord, undistractedly,
36and if any one doth think [it] to be unseemly to his virgin, if she may be beyond the bloom of age, and it ought so to be, what he willeth let him do; he doth not sin--let him marry.
37And he who hath stood stedfast in the heart--not having necessity--and hath authority over his own will, and this he hath determined in his heart--to keep his own virgin--doth well;
38so that both he who is giving in marriage doth well, and he who is not giving in marriage doth better.
39A wife hath been bound by law as long time as her husband may live, and if her husband may sleep, she is free to be married to whom she will--only in the Lord;
40and she is happier if she may so remain--according to my judgment; and I think I also have the Spirit of God.
1And concerning the things sacrificed to idols, we have known that we all have knowledge: knowledge puffeth up, but love buildeth up;
2and if any one doth think to know anything, he hath not yet known anything according as it behoveth [him] to know;
3and if any one doth love God, this one hath been known by Him.
4Concerning the eating then of the things sacrificed to idols, we have known that an idol [is] nothing in the world, and that there is no other God except one;
5for even if there are those called gods, whether in heaven, whether upon earth-- as there are gods many and lords many--
6yet to us [is] one God, the Father, of whom [are] the all things, and we to Him; and one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom [are] the all things, and we through Him;
7but not in all men [is] the knowledge, and certain with conscience of the idol, till now, as a thing sacrificed to an idol do eat [it], and their conscience, being weak, is defiled.
8But victuals do not commend us to God, for neither if we may eat are we in advance; nor if we may not eat, are we behind;
9but see, lest this privilege of yours may become a stumbling-block to the infirm,
10for if any one may see thee that hast knowledge in an idol's temple reclining at meat--shall not his conscience--he being infirm--be emboldened to eat the things sacrificed to idols,
11and the brother who is infirm shall perish by thy knowledge, because of whom Christ died?
12and thus sinning in regard to the brethren, and smiting their weak conscience-- in regard to Christ ye sin;
13wherefore, if victuals cause my brother to stumble, I may eat no flesh--to the age--that my brother I may not cause to stumble.
1Am not I an apostle? am not I free? Jesus Christ our Lord have I not seen? my work are not ye in the Lord?
2if to others I am not an apostle--yet doubtless to you I am; for the seal of my apostleship are ye in the Lord.
3My defence to those who examine me in this;
4have we not authority to eat and to drink?
5have we not authority a sister--a wife--to lead about, as also the other apostles, and the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas?
6or only I and Barnabas, have we not authority--not to work?
7who doth serve as a soldier at his own charges at any time? who doth plant a vineyard, and of its fruit doth not eat? or who doth feed a flock, and of the milk of the flock doth not eat?
8According to man do I speak these things? or doth not also the law say these things?
9for in the law of Moses it hath been written, `thou shalt not muzzle an ox treading out corn;' for the oxen doth God care?
10or because of us by all means doth He say [it]? yes, because of us it was written, because in hope ought the plower to plow, and he who is treading [ought] of his hope to partake in hope.
11If we to you the spiritual things did sow--great [is it] if we your fleshly things do reap?
12if others do partake of the authority over you--not we more? but we did not use this authority, but all things we bear, that we may give no hindrance to the good news of the Christ.
13Have ye not known that those working about the things of the temple--of the temple do eat, and those waiting at the altar--with the altar are partakers?
14so also did the Lord direct to those proclaiming the good news: of the good news to live.
15And I have used none of these things; neither did I write these things that it may be so done in my case, for [it is] good for me rather to die, than that any one may make my glorying void;
16for if I may proclaim good news, it is no glorying for me, for necessity is laid upon me, and woe is to me if I may not proclaim good news;
17for if willing I do this, I have a reward; and if unwillingly--with a stewardship I have been entrusted!
18What, then, is my reward? --that proclaiming good news, without charge I shall make the good news of the Christ, not to abuse my authority in the good news;
19for being free from all men, to all men I made myself servant, that the more I might gain;
20and I became to the Jews as a Jew, that Jews I might gain; to those under law as under law, that those under law I might gain;
21to those without law, as without law--(not being without law to God, but within law to Christ) --that I might gain those without law;
22I became to the infirm as infirm, that the infirm I might gain; to all men I have become all things, that by all means I may save some.
23And this I do because of the good news, that a fellow-partaker of it I may become;
24have ye not known that those running in a race--all indeed run, but one doth receive the prize? so run ye, that ye may obtain;
25and every one who is striving, is in all things temperate; these, indeed, then, that a corruptible crown they may receive, but we an incorruptible;
26I, therefore, thus run, not as uncertainly, thus I fight, as not beating air;
27but I chastise my body, and bring [it] into servitude, lest by any means, having preached to others--I myself may become disapproved.
1And I do not wish you to be ignorant, brethren, that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea,
2and all to Moses were baptized in the cloud, and in the sea;
3and all the same spiritual food did eat,
4and all the same spiritual drink did drink, for they were drinking of a spiritual rock following them, and the rock was the Christ;
5but in the most of them God was not well pleased, for they were strewn in the wilderness,
6and those things became types of us, for our not passionately desiring evil things, as also these did desire.
7Neither become ye idolaters, as certain of them, as it hath been written, `The people sat down to eat and to drink, and stood up to play;'
8neither may we commit whoredom, as certain of them did commit whoredom, and there fell in one day twenty-three thousand;
9neither may we tempt the Christ, as also certain of them did tempt, and by the serpents did perish;
10neither murmur ye, as also some of them did murmur, and did perish by the destroyer.
11And all these things as types did happen to those persons, and they were written for our admonition, to whom the end of the ages did come,
12so that he who is thinking to stand--let him observe, lest he fall.
13No temptation hath taken you--except human; and God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above what ye are able, but He will make, with the temptation, also the outlet, for your being able to bear [it].
14Wherefore, my beloved, flee from the idolatry;
15as to wise men I speak--judge ye what I say:
16The cup of the blessing that we bless--is it not the fellowship of the blood of the Christ? the bread that we break--is it not the fellowship of the body of the Christ?
17because one bread, one body, are we the many--for we all of the one bread do partake.
18See Israel according to the flesh! are not those eating the sacrifices in the fellowship of the altar?
19what then do I say? that an idol is anything? or that a sacrifice offered to an idol is anything? --
20[no,] but that the things that the nations sacrifice--they sacrifice to demons and not to God; and I do not wish you to come into the fellowship of the demons.
21Ye are not able the cup of the Lord to drink, and the cup of demons; ye are not able of the table of the Lord to partake, and of the table of demons;
22do we arouse the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger than He?
23All things to me are lawful, but all things are not profitable; all things to me are lawful, but all things do not build up;
24let no one seek his own--but each another's.
25Whatever in the meat-market is sold eat ye, not inquiring, because of the conscience,
26for the Lord's [is] the earth, and its fulness;
27and if any one of the unbelieving do call you, and ye wish to go, all that is set before you eat, nothing inquiring, because of the conscience;
28and if any one may say to you, `This is a thing sacrificed to an idol,' --do not eat, because of that one who shewed [it], and of the conscience, for the Lord's [is] the earth and its fulness:
29and conscience, I say, not of thyself, but of the other, for why [is it] that my liberty is judged by another's conscience?
30and if I thankfully do partake, why am I evil spoken of, for that for which I give thanks?
31Whether, then, ye eat, or drink, or do anything, do all to the glory of God;
32become offenceless, both to Jews and Greeks, and to the assembly of God;
33as I also in all things do please all, not seeking my own profit, but that of many--that they may be saved.
1Followers of me become ye, as I also [am] of Christ.
2And I praise you, brethren, that in all things ye remember me, and according as I did deliver to you, the deliverances ye keep,
3and I wish you to know that of every man the head is the Christ, and the head of a woman is the husband, and the head of Christ is God.
4Every man praying or prophesying, having the head covered, doth dishonour his head,
5and every woman praying or prophesying with the head uncovered, doth dishonour her own head, for it is one and the same thing with her being shaven,
6for if a woman is not covered--then let her be shorn, and if [it is] a shame for a woman to be shorn or shaven--let her be covered;
7for a man, indeed, ought not to cover the head, being the image and glory of God, and a woman is the glory of a man,
8for a man is not of a woman, but a woman [is] of a man,
9for a man also was not created because of the woman, but a woman because of the man;
10because of this the woman ought to have [a token of] authority upon the head, because of the messengers;
11but neither [is] a man apart from a woman, nor a woman apart from a man, in the Lord,
12for as the woman [is] of the man, so also the man [is] through the woman, and the all things [are] of God.
13In your own selves judge ye; is it seemly for a woman uncovered to pray to God?
14doth not even nature itself teach you, that if a man indeed have long hair, a dishonour it is to him?
15and a woman, if she have long hair, a glory it is to her, because the hair instead of a covering hath been given to her;
16and if any one doth think to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the assemblies of God.
17And this declaring, I give no praise, because not for the better, but for the worse ye come together;
18for first, indeed, ye coming together in an assembly, I hear of divisions being among you, and partly I believe [it],
19for it behoveth sects also to be among you, that those approved may become manifest among you;
20ye, then, coming together at the same place--it is not to eat the Lord's supper;
21for each his own supper doth take before in the eating, and one is hungry, and another is drunk;
22why, have ye not houses to eat and to drink in? or the assembly of God do ye despise, and shame those not having? what may I say to you? shall I praise you in this? I do not praise!
23For I--I received from the Lord that which also I did deliver to you, that the Lord Jesus in the night in which he was delivered up, took bread,
24and having given thanks, he brake, and said, `Take ye, eat ye, this is my body, that for you is being broken; this do ye--to the remembrance of me.'
25In like manner also the cup after the supping, saying, `This cup is the new covenant in my blood; this do ye, as often as ye may drink [it] --to the remembrance of me;'
26for as often as ye may eat this bread, and this cup may drink, the death of the Lord ye do shew forth--till he may come;
27so that whoever may eat this bread or may drink the cup of the Lord unworthily, guilty he shall be of the body and blood of the Lord:
28and let a man be proving himself, and so of the bread let him eat, and of the cup let him drink;
29for he who is eating and drinking unworthily, judgment to himself he doth eat and drink--not discerning the body of the Lord.
30Because of this, among you many [are] weak and sickly, and sleep do many;
31for if ourselves we were discerning, we would not be being judged,
32and being judged by the Lord, we are chastened, that with the world we may not be condemned;
33so then, my brethren, coming together to eat, for one another wait ye;
34and if any one is hungry, at home let him eat, that to judgment ye may not come together; and the rest, whenever I may come, I shall arrange.
1And concerning the spiritual things, brethren, I do not wish you to be ignorant;
2ye have known that ye were nations, unto the dumb idols--as ye were led-- being carried away;
3wherefore, I give you to understand that no one, in the Spirit of God speaking, saith Jesus [is] anathema, and no one is able to say Jesus [is] Lord, except in the Holy Spirit.
4And there are diversities of gifts, and the same Spirit;
5and there are diversities of ministrations, and the same Lord;
6and there are diversities of workings, and it is the same God--who is working the all in all.
7And to each hath been given the manifestation of the Spirit for profit;
8for to one through the Spirit hath been given a word of wisdom, and to another a word of knowledge, according to the same Spirit;
9and to another faith in the same Spirit, and to another gifts of healings in the same Spirit;
10and to another in-workings of mighty deeds; and to another prophecy; and to another discernings of spirits; and to another [divers] kinds of tongues; and to another interpretation of tongues:
11and all these doth work the one and the same Spirit, dividing to each severally as he intendeth.
12For, even as the body is one, and hath many members, and all the members of the one body, being many, are one body, so also [is] the Christ,
13for also in one Spirit we all to one body were baptized, whether Jews or Greeks, whether servants or freemen, and all into one Spirit were made to drink,
14for also the body is not one member, but many;
15if the foot may say, `Because I am not a hand, I am not of the body;' it is not, because of this, not of the body;
16and if the ear may say, `Because I am not an eye, I am not of the body;' it is not, because of this, not of the body?
17If the whole body [were] an eye, where the hearing? if the whole hearing, where the smelling?
18and now, God did set the members each one of them in the body, according as He willed,
19and if all were one member, where the body?
20and now, indeed, [are] many members, and one body;
21and an eye is not able to say to the hand, `I have no need of thee;' nor again the head to the feet, `I have no need of you.'
22But much more the members of the body which seem to be more infirm are necessary,
23and those that we think to be less honourable of the body, around these we put more abundant honour, and our unseemly things have seemliness more abundant,
24and our seemly things have no need; but God did temper the body together, to the lacking part having given more abundant honour,
25that there may be no division in the body, but that the members may have the same anxiety for one another,
26and whether one member doth suffer, suffer with [it] do all the members, or one member is glorified, rejoice with [it] do all the members;
27and ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular.
28And some, indeed, did God set in the assembly, first apostles, secondly prophets, thirdly teachers, afterwards powers, afterwards gifts of healings, helpings, governings, divers kinds of tongues;
29[are] all apostles? [are] all prophets? [are] all teachers? [are] all powers?
30have all gifts of healings? do all speak with tongues? do all interpret?
31and desire earnestly the better gifts; and yet a far excelling way do I shew to you:
1If with the tongues of men and of messengers I speak, and have not love, I have become brass sounding, or a cymbal tinkling;
2and if I have prophecy, and know all the secrets, and all the knowledge, and if I have all the faith, so as to remove mountains, and have not love, I am nothing;
3and if I give away to feed others all my goods, and if I give up my body that I may be burned, and have not love, I am profited nothing.
4The love is long-suffering, it is kind, the love doth not envy, the love doth not vaunt itself, is not puffed up,
5doth not act unseemly, doth not seek its own things, is not provoked, doth not impute evil,
6rejoiceth not over the unrighteousness, and rejoiceth with the truth;
7all things it beareth, all it believeth, all it hopeth, all it endureth.
8The love doth never fail; and whether [there be] prophecies, they shall become useless; whether tongues, they shall cease; whether knowledge, it shall become useless;
9for in part we know, and in part we prophecy;
10and when that which is perfect may come, then that which [is] in part shall become useless.
11When I was a babe, as a babe I was speaking, as a babe I was thinking, as a babe I was reasoning, and when I have become a man, I have made useless the things of the babe;
12for we see now through a mirror obscurely, and then face to face; now I know in part, and then I shall fully know, as also I was known;
13and now there doth remain faith, hope, love--these three; and the greatest of these [is] love.
1Pursue the love, and seek earnestly the spiritual things, and rather that ye may prophecy,
2for he who is speaking in an [unknown] tongue--to men he doth not speak, but to God, for no one doth hearken, and in spirit he doth speak secrets;
3and he who is prophesying to men doth speak edification, and exhortation, and comfort;
4he who is speaking in an [unknown] tongue, himself doth edify, and he who is prophesying, an assembly doth edify;
5and I wish you all to speak with tongues, and more that ye may prophecy, for greater is he who is prophesying than he who is speaking with tongues, except one may interpret, that the assembly may receive edification.
6And now, brethren, if I may come unto you speaking tongues, what shall I profit you, except I shall speak to you either in revelation, or in knowledge, or in prophesying, or in teaching?
7yet the things without life giving sound--whether pipe or harp--if a difference in the sounds they may not give, how shall be known that which is piped or that which is harped?
8for if also an uncertain sound a trumpet may give, who shall prepare himself for battle?
9so also ye, if through the tongue, speech easily understood ye may not give-- how shall that which is spoken be known? for ye shall be speaking to air.
10There are, it may be, so many kinds of voices in the world, and none of them is unmeaning,
11if, then, I do not know the power of the voice, I shall be to him who is speaking a foreigner, and he who is speaking, is to me a foreigner;
12so also ye, since ye are earnestly desirous of spiritual gifts, for the building up of the assembly seek that ye may abound;
13wherefore he who is speaking in an [unknown] tongue--let him pray that he may interpret;
14for if I pray in an [unknown] tongue, my spirit doth pray, and my understanding is unfruitful.
15What then is it? I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray also with the understanding; I will sing psalms with the spirit, and I will sing psalms also with the understanding;
16since, if thou mayest bless with the spirit, he who is filling the place of the unlearned, how shall he say the Amen at thy giving of thanks, since what thou dost say he hath not known?
17for thou, indeed, dost give thanks well, but the other is not built up!
18I give thanks to my God--more than you all with tongues speaking--
19but in an assembly I wish to speak five words through my understanding, that others also I may instruct, rather than myriads of words in an [unknown] tongue.
20Brethren, become not children in the understanding, but in the evil be ye babes, and in the understanding become ye perfect;
21in the law it hath been written, that, `With other tongues and with other lips I will speak to this people, and not even so will they hear Me, saith the Lord;'
22so that the tongues are for a sign, not to the believing, but to the unbelieving; and the prophesy [is] not for the unbelieving, but for the believing,
23If, therefore, the whole assembly may come together, to the same place, and all may speak with tongues, and there may come in unlearned or unbelievers, will they not say that ye are mad?
24and if all may prophecy, and any one may come in, an unbeliever or unlearned, he is convicted by all, he is discerned by all,
25and so the secrets of his heart become manifest, and so having fallen upon [his] face, he will bow before God, declaring that God really is among you.
26What then is it, brethren? whenever ye may come together, each of you hath a psalm, hath a teaching, hath a tongue, hath a revelation, hath an interpretation? let all things be for building up;
27if an [unknown] tongue any one do speak, by two, or at the most, by three, and in turn, and let one interpret;
28and if there may be no interpreter, let him be silent in an assembly, and to himself let him speak, and to God.
29And prophets--let two or three speak, and let the others discern,
30and if to another sitting [anything] may be revealed, let the first be silent;
31for ye are able, one by one, all to prophesy, that all may learn, and all may be exhorted,
32and the spiritual gift of prophets to prophets are subject,
33for God is not [a God] of tumult, but of peace, as in all the assemblies of the saints.
34Your women in the assemblies let them be silent, for it hath not been permitted to them to speak, but to be subject, as also the law saith;
35and if they wish to learn anything, at home their own husbands let them question, for it is a shame to women to speak in an assembly.
36From you did the word of God come forth? or to you alone did it come?
37if any one doth think to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge the things that I write to you--that of the Lord they are commands;
38and if any one is ignorant--let him be ignorant;
39so that, brethren, earnestly desire to prophesy, and to speak with tongues do not forbid;
40let all things be done decently and in order.
1And I make known to you, brethren, the good news that I proclaimed to you, which also ye did receive, in which also ye have stood,
2through which also ye are being saved, in what words I proclaimed good news to you, if ye hold fast, except ye did believe in vain,
3for I delivered to you first, what also I did receive, that Christ died for our sins, according to the Writings,
4and that he was buried, and that he hath risen on the third day, according to the Writings,
5and that he appeared to Cephas, then to the twelve,
6afterwards he appeared to above five hundred brethren at once, of whom the greater part remain till now, and certain also did fall asleep;
7afterwards he appeared to James, then to all the apostles.
8And last of all--as to the untimely birth--he appeared also to me,
9for I am the least of the apostles, who am not worthy to be called an apostle, because I did persecute the assembly of God,
10and by the grace of God I am what I am, and His grace that [is] towards me came not in vain, but more abundantly than they all did I labour, yet not I, but the grace of God that [is] with me;
11whether, then, I or they, so we preach, and so ye did believe.
12And if Christ is preached, that out of the dead he hath risen, how say certain among you, that there is no rising again of dead persons?
13and if there be no rising again of dead persons, neither hath Christ risen;
14and if Christ hath not risen, then void [is] our preaching, and void also your faith,
15and we also are found false witnesses of God, because we did testify of God that He raised up the Christ, whom He did not raise if then dead persons do not rise;
16for if dead persons do not rise, neither hath Christ risen,
17and if Christ hath not risen, vain is your faith, ye are yet in your sins;
18then, also, those having fallen asleep in Christ did perish;
19if in this life we have hope in Christ only, of all men we are most to be pitied.
20And now, Christ hath risen out of the dead--the first-fruits of those sleeping he became,
21for since through man [is] the death, also through man [is] a rising again of the dead,
22for even as in Adam all die, so also in the Christ all shall be made alive,
23and each in his proper order, a first-fruit Christ, afterwards those who are the Christ's, in his presence,
24then--the end, when he may deliver up the reign to God, even the Father, when he may have made useless all rule, and all authority and power--
25for it behoveth him to reign till he may have put all the enemies under his feet--
26the last enemy is done away--death;
27for all things He did put under his feet, and, when one may say that all things have been subjected, [it is] evident that He is excepted who did subject the all things to him,
28and when the all things may be subjected to him, then the Son also himself shall be subject to Him, who did subject to him the all things, that God may be the all in all.
29Seeing what shall they do who are baptized for the dead, if the dead do not rise at all? why also are they baptized for the dead?
30why also do we stand in peril every hour?
31Every day do I die, by the glorying of you that I have in Christ Jesus our Lord:
32if after the manner of a man with wild beasts I fought in Ephesus, what the advantage to me if the dead do not rise? let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die!
33Be not led astray; evil communications corrupt good manners;
34awake up, as is right, and sin not; for certain have an ignorance of God; for shame to you I say [it].
35But some one will say, `How do the dead rise?
36unwise! thou--what thou dost sow is not quickened except it may die;
37and that which thou dost sow, not the body that shall be dost thou sow, but bare grain, it may be of wheat, or of some one of the others,
38and God doth give to it a body according as He willed, and to each of the seeds its proper body.
39All flesh [is] not the same flesh, but there is one flesh of men, and another flesh of beasts, and another of fishes, and another of birds;
40and [there are] heavenly bodies, and earthly bodies; but one [is] the glory of the heavenly, and another that of the earthly;
41one glory of sun, and another glory of moon, and another glory of stars, for star from star doth differ in glory.
42So also [is] the rising again of the dead: it is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption;
43it is sown in dishonour, it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power;
44it is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body; there is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body;
45so also it hath been written, `The first man Adam became a living creature,' the last Adam [is] for a life-giving spirit,
46but that which is spiritual [is] not first, but that which [was] natural, afterwards that which [is] spiritual.
47The first man [is] out of the earth, earthy; the second man [is] the Lord out of heaven;
48as [is] the earthy, such [are] also the earthy; and as [is] the heavenly, such [are] also the heavenly;
49and, according as we did bear the image of the earthy, we shall bear also the image of the heavenly.
50And this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood the reign of God is not able to inherit, nor doth the corruption inherit the incorruption;
51lo, I tell you a secret; we indeed shall not all sleep, and we all shall be changed;
52in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, in the last trumpet, for it shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we--we shall be changed:
53for it behoveth this corruptible to put on incorruption, and this mortal to put on immortality;
54and when this corruptible may have put on incorruption, and this mortal may have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the word that hath been written, `The Death was swallowed up--to victory;
55where, O Death, thy sting? where, O Hades, thy victory?'
56and the sting of the death [is] the sin, and the power of the sin the law;
57and to God--thanks, to Him who is giving us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ;
58so that, my brethren beloved, become ye stedfast, unmovable, abounding in the work of the Lord at all times, knowing that your labour is not vain in the Lord.
1And concerning the collection that [is] for the saints, as I directed to the assemblies of Galatia, so also ye--do ye;
2on every first [day] of the week, let each one of you lay by him, treasuring up whatever he may have prospered, that when I may come then collections may not be made;
3and whenever I may come, whomsoever ye may approve, through letters, these I will send to carry your favour to Jerusalem;
4and if it be meet for me also to go, with me they shall go.
5And I will come unto you, when I pass through Macedonia--for Macedonia I do pass through--
6and with you, it may be, I will abide, or even winter, that ye may send me forward whithersoever I go,
7for I do not wish to see you now in the passing, but I hope to remain a certain time with you, if the Lord may permit;
8and I will remain in Ephesus till the Pentecost,
9for a door to me hath been opened--great and effectual--and withstanders [are] many.
10And if Timotheus may come, see that he may become without fear with you, for the work of the Lord he doth work, even as I,
11no one, then, may despise him; and send ye him forward in peace, that he may come to me, for I expect him with the brethren;
12and concerning Apollos our brother, much I did entreat him that he may come unto you with the brethren, and it was not at all [his] will that he may come now, and he will come when he may find convenient.
13Watch ye, stand in the faith; be men, be strong;
14let all your things be done in love.
15And I entreat you, brethren, ye have known the household of Stephanas, that it is the first-fruit of Achaia, and to the ministration to the saints they did set themselves--
16that ye also be subject to such, and to every one who is working with [us] and labouring;
17and I rejoice over the presence of Stephanas, and Fortunatus, and Achaicus, because the lack of you did these fill up;
18for they did refresh my spirit and yours; acknowledge ye, therefore, those who [are] such.
19Salute you do the assemblies of Asia; salute you much in the Lord do Aquilas and Priscilla, with the assembly in their house;
20salute you do all the brethren; salute ye one another in an holy kiss.
21The salutation of [me] Paul with my hand;
22if any one doth not love the Lord Jesus Christ--let him be anathema! The Lord hath come!
23The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ [is] with you;
24my love [is] with you all in Christ Jesus. Amen.
1Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ, through the will of God, and Timotheus the brother, to the assembly of God that is in Corinth, with all the saints who are in all Achaia:
2Grace to you and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ!
3Blessed [is] God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of the mercies, and God of all comfort,
4who is comforting us in all our tribulation, for our being able to comfort those in any tribulation through the comfort with which we are comforted ourselves by God;
5because, as the sufferings of the Christ do abound to us, so through the Christ doth abound also our comfort;
6and whether we be in tribulation, [it is] for your comfort and salvation, that is wrought in the enduring of the same sufferings that we also suffer; whether we are comforted, [it is] for your comfort and salvation;
7and our hope [is] stedfast for you, knowing that even as ye are partakers of the sufferings--so also of the comfort.
8For we do not wish you to be ignorant, brethren, of our tribulation that happened to us in Asia, that we were exceedingly burdened above [our] power, so that we despaired even of life;
9but we ourselves in ourselves the sentence of the death have had, that we may not be trusting on ourselves, but on God, who is raising the dead,
10who out of so great a death did deliver us, and doth deliver, in whom we have hoped that even yet He will deliver;
11ye working together also for us by your supplication, that the gift through many persons to us, through many may be thankfully acknowledged for us.
12For our glorying is this: the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and sincerity of God, not in fleshly wisdom, but in the grace of God, we did conduct ourselves in the world, and more abundantly toward you;
13for no other things do we write to you, but what ye either do read or also acknowledge, and I hope that also unto the end ye shall acknowledge,
14according as also ye did acknowledge us in part, that your glory we are, even as also ye [are] ours, in the day of the Lord Jesus;
15and in this confidence I was purposing to come unto you before, that a second favour ye might have,
16and through you to pass to Macedonia, and again from Macedonia to come unto you, and by you to be sent forward to Judea.
17This, therefore, counselling, did I then use the lightness; or the things that I counsel, according to the flesh do I counsel, that it may be with me Yes, yes, and No, no?
18and God [is] faithful, that our word unto you became not Yes and No,
19for the Son of God, Jesus Christ, among you through us having been preached- -through me and Silvanus and Timotheus--did not become Yes and No, but in him it hath become Yes;
20for as many as [are] promises of God, in him [are] the Yes, and in him the Amen, for glory to God through us;
21and He who is confirming you with us into Christ, and did anoint us, [is] God,
22who also sealed us, and gave the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts.
23And I for a witness on God do call upon my soul, that sparing you, I came not yet to Corinth;
24not that we are lords over your faith, but we are workers together with your joy, for by the faith ye stand.
1And I decided this to myself, not again to come in sorrow unto you,
2for if I make you sorry, then who is he who is making me glad, except he who is made sorry by me?
3and I wrote to you this same thing, that having come, I may not have sorrow from them of whom it behoved me to have joy, having confidence in you all, that my joy is of you all,
4for out of much tribulation and pressure of heart I wrote to you through many tears, not that ye might be made sorry, but that ye might know the love that I have more abundantly toward you.
5And if any one hath caused sorrow, he hath not caused sorrow to me, but in part, that I may not burden you all;
6sufficient to such a one is this punishment, that [is] by the more part,
7so that, on the contrary, [it is] rather for you to forgive and to comfort, lest by over abundant sorrow such a one may be swallowed up;
8wherefore, I call upon you to confirm love to him,
9for, for this also did I write, that I might know the proof of you, whether in regard to all things ye are obedient.
10And to whom ye forgive anything--I also; for I also, if I have forgiven anything, to whom I have forgiven [it], because of you--in the person of Christ--[I forgive it,]
11that we may not be over-reached by the Adversary, for of his devices we are not ignorant.
12And having come to Troas for the good news of the Christ, and a door to me having been opened in the Lord,
13I have not had rest to my spirit, on my not finding Titus my brother, but having taken leave of them, I went forth to Macedonia;
14and to God [are] thanks, who at all times is leading us in triumph in the Christ, and the fragrance of His knowledge He is manifesting through us in every place,
15because of Christ a sweet fragrance we are to God, in those being saved, and in those being lost;
16to the one, indeed, a fragrance of death to death, and to the other, a fragrance of life to life; and for these things who is sufficient?
17for we are not as the many, adulterating the word of God, but as of sincerity-- but as of God; in the presence of God, in Christ we do speak.
1Do we begin again to recommend ourselves, except we need, as some, letters of recommendation unto you, or from you?
2our letter ye are, having been written in our hearts, known and read by all men,
3manifested that ye are a letter of Christ ministered by us, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, not in the tablets of stone, but in fleshy tablets of the heart,
4and such trust we have through the Christ toward God,
5not that we are sufficient of ourselves to think anything, as of ourselves, but our sufficiency [is] of God,
6who also made us sufficient [to be] ministrants of a new covenant, not of letter, but of spirit; for the letter doth kill, and the spirit doth make alive.
7and if the ministration of the death, in letters, engraved in stones, came in glory, so that the sons of Israel were not able to look stedfastly to the face of Moses, because of the glory of his face--which was being made useless,
8how shall the ministration of the Spirit not be more in glory?
9for if the ministration of the condemnation [is] glory, much more doth the ministration of the righteousness abound in glory;
10for also even that which hath been glorious, hath not been glorious--in this respect, because of the superior glory;
11for if that which is being made useless [is] through glory, much more that which is remaining [is] in glory.
12Having, then, such hope, we use much freedom of speech,
13and [are] not as Moses, who was putting a vail upon his own face, for the sons of Israel not stedfastly to look to the end of that which is being made useless,
14but their minds were hardened, for unto this day the same vail at the reading of the Old Covenant doth remain unwithdrawn--which in Christ is being made useless--
15but till to-day, when Moses is read, a vail upon their heart doth lie,
16and whenever they may turn unto the Lord, the vail is taken away.
17And the Lord is the Spirit; and where the Spirit of the Lord [is], there [is] liberty;
18and we all, with unvailed face, the glory of the Lord beholding in a mirror, to the same image are being transformed, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord.
1Because of this, having this ministration, according as we did receive kindness, we do not faint,
2but did renounce for ourselves the hidden things of shame, not walking in craftiness, nor deceitfully using the word of God, but by the manifestation of the truth recommending ourselves unto every conscience of men, before God;
3and if also our good news is vailed, in those perishing it is vailed,
4in whom the god of this age did blind the minds of the unbelieving, that there doth not shine forth to them the enlightening of the good news of the glory of the Christ, who is the image of God;
5for not ourselves do we preach, but Christ Jesus--Lord, and ourselves your servants because of Jesus;
6because [it is] God who said, Out of darkness light [is] to shine, who did shine in our hearts, for the enlightening of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.
7And we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us;
8on every side being in tribulation, but not straitened; perplexed, but not in despair;
9persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed;
10at all times the dying of the Lord Jesus bearing about in the body, that the life also of Jesus in our body may be manifested,
11for always are we who are living delivered up to death because of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our dying flesh,
12so that, the death indeed in us doth work, and the life in you.
13And having the same spirit of the faith, according to that which hath been written, `I believed, therefore I did speak;' we also do believe, therefore also do we speak;
14knowing that He who did raise up the Lord Jesus, us also through Jesus shall raise up, and shall present with you,
15for the all things [are] because of you, that the grace having been multiplied, because of the thanksgiving of the more, may abound to the glory of God;
16wherefore, we faint not, but if also our outward man doth decay, yet the inward is renewed day by day;
17for the momentary light matter of our tribulation, more and more exceedingly an age-during weight of glory doth work out for us--
18we not looking to the things seen, but to the things not seen; for the things seen [are] temporary, but the things not seen [are] age-during.
1For we have known that if our earthly house of the tabernacle may be thrown down, a building from God we have, an house not made with hands--age-during--in the heavens,
2for also in this we groan, with our dwelling that is from heaven earnestly desiring to clothe ourselves,
3if so be that, having clothed ourselves, we shall not be found naked,
4for we also who are in the tabernacle do groan, being burdened, seeing we wish not to unclothe ourselves, but to clothe ourselves, that the mortal may be swallowed up of the life.
5And He who did work us to this self-same thing [is] God, who also did give to us the earnest of the Spirit;
6having courage, then, at all times, and knowing that being at home in the body, we are away from home from the Lord, --
7for through faith we walk, not through sight--
8we have courage, and are well pleased rather to be away from the home of the body, and to be at home with the Lord.
9Wherefore also we are ambitious, whether at home or away from home, to be well pleasing to him,
10for all of us it behoveth to be manifested before the tribunal of the Christ, that each one may receive the things [done] through the body, in reference to the things that he did, whether good or evil;
11having known, therefore, the fear of the Lord, we persuade men, and to God we are manifested, and I hope also in your consciences to have been manifested;
12for not again ourselves do we recommend to you, but we are giving occasion to you of glorifying in our behalf, that ye may have [something] in reference to those glorifying in face and not in heart;
13for whether we were beside ourselves, [it was] to God; whether we be of sound mind--[it is] to you,
14for the love of the Christ doth constrain us, having judged thus: that if one for all died, then the whole died,
15and for all he died, that those living, no more to themselves may live, but to him who died for them, and was raised again.
16So that we henceforth have known no one according to the flesh, and even if we have known Christ according to the flesh, yet now we know him no more;
17so that if any one [is] in Christ--[he is] a new creature; the old things did pass away, lo, become new have the all things.
18And the all things [are] of God, who reconciled us to Himself through Jesus Christ, and did give to us the ministration of the reconciliation,
19how that God was in Christ--a world reconciling to Himself, not reckoning to them their trespasses; and having put in us the word of the reconciliation,
20in behalf of Christ, then, we are ambassadors, as if God were calling through us, we beseech, in behalf of Christ, `Be ye reconciled to God;'
21for him who did not know sin, in our behalf He did make sin, that we may become the righteousness of God in him.
1And working together also we call upon [you] that ye receive not in vain the grace of God--
2for He saith, `In an acceptable time I did hear thee, and in a day of salvation I did help thee, lo, now [is] a well-accepted time; lo, now, a day of salvation,' --
3in nothing giving any cause of offence, that the ministration may be not blamed,
4but in everything recommending ourselves as God's ministrants; in much patience, in tribulations, in necessities, in distresses,
5in stripes, in imprisonments, in insurrections, in labours, in watchings, in fastings,
6in pureness, in knowledge, in long-suffering, in kindness, in the Holy Spirit, in love unfeigned,
7in the word of truth, in the power of God, through the armour of the righteousness, on the right and on the left,
8through glory and dishonour, through evil report and good report, as leading astray, and true;
9as unknown, and recognized; as dying, and lo, we live; as chastened, and not put to death;
10as sorrowful, and always rejoicing; as poor, and making many rich; as having nothing, and possessing all things.
11Our mouth hath been open unto you, O Corinthians, our heart hath been enlarged!
12ye are not straitened in us, and ye are straitened in your [own] bowels,
13and [as] a recompense of the same kind, (as to children I say [it],) be ye enlarged--also ye!
14Become not yoked with others--unbelievers, for what partaking [is there] to righteousness and lawlessness?
15and what fellowship to light with darkness? and what concord to Christ with Belial? or what part to a believer with an unbeliever?
16and what agreement to the sanctuary of God with idols? for ye are a sanctuary of the living God, according as God said--`I will dwell in them, and will walk among [them], and I will be their God, and they shall be My people,
17wherefore, come ye forth out of the midst of them, and be separated, saith the Lord, and an unclean thing do not touch, and I--I will receive you,
18and I will be to you for a Father, and ye--ye shall be to Me for sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty.'
1Having, then, these promises, beloved, may we cleanse ourselves from every pollution of flesh and spirit, perfecting sanctification in the fear of God;
2receive us; no one did we wrong; no one did we waste; no one did we defraud;
3not to condemn you do I say [it], for I have said before that in our hearts ye are to die with and to live with;
4great [is] my freedom of speech unto you, great my glory on your behalf; I have been filled with the comfort, I overabound with the joy on all our tribulation,
5for also we, having come to Macedonia, no relaxation hath our flesh had, but on every side we are in tribulation, without [are] fightings, within--fears;
6but He who is comforting the cast-down--God--He did comfort us in the presence of Titus;
7and not only in his presence, but also in the comfort with which he was comforted over you, declaring to us your longing desire, your lamentation, your zeal for me, so that the more I did rejoice,
8because even if I made you sorry in the letter, I do not repent--if even I did repent--for I perceive that the letter, even if for an hour, did make you sorry.
9I now do rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye were made sorry to reformation, for ye were made sorry toward God, that in nothing ye might receive damage from us;
10for the sorrow toward God reformation to salvation not to be repented of doth work, and the sorrow of the world doth work death,
11for, lo, this same thing--your being made sorry toward God--how much diligence it doth work in you! but defence, but displeasure, but fear, but longing desire, but zeal, but revenge; in every thing ye did approve yourselves to be pure in the matter.
12If, then, I also wrote to you--not for his cause who did wrong, nor for his cause who did suffer wrong, but for our diligence in your behalf being manifested unto you before God--
13because of this we have been comforted in your comfort, and more abundantly the more did we rejoice in the joy of Titus, that his spirit hath been refreshed from you all;
14because if anything to him in your behalf I have boasted, I was not put to shame; but as all things in truth we did speak to you, so also our boasting before Titus became truth,
15and his tender affection is more abundantly toward you, remembering the obedience of you all, how with fear and trembling ye did receive him;
16I rejoice, therefore, that in everything I have courage in you.
1And we make known to you, brethren, the grace of God, that hath been given in the assemblies of Macedonia,
2because in much trial of tribulation the abundance of their joy, and their deep poverty, did abound to the riches of their liberality;
3because, according to [their] power, I testify, and above [their] power, they were willing of themselves,
4with much entreaty calling on us to receive the favour and the fellowship of the ministration to the saints,
5and not according as we expected, but themselves they did give first to the Lord, and to us, through the will of God,
6so that we exhorted Titus, that, according as he did begin before, so also he may finish to you also this favour,
7but even as in every thing ye do abound, in faith, and word, and knowledge, and all diligence, and in your love to us, that also in this grace ye may abound;
8not according to command do I speak, but because of the diligence of others, and of your love proving the genuineness,
9for ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that because of you he became poor--being rich, that ye by that poverty may become rich.
10and an opinion in this do I give: for this to you [is] expedient, who not only to do, but also to will, did begin before--a year ago,
11and now also finish doing [it], that even as [there is] the readiness of the will, so also the finishing, out of that which ye have,
12for if the willing mind is present, according to that which any one may have it is well-accepted, not according to that which he hath not;
13for not that for others release, and ye pressured, [do I speak,]
14but by equality, at the present time your abundance--for their want, that also their abundance may be for your want, that there may be equality,
15according as it hath been written, `He who [did gather] much, had nothing over; and he who [did gather] little, had no lack.'
16And thanks to God, who is putting the same diligence for you in the heart of
17because indeed the exhortation he accepted, and being more diligent, of his own accord he went forth unto you,
18and we sent with him the brother, whose praise in the good news [is] through all the assemblies,
19and not only so, but who was also appointed by vote by the assemblies, our fellow-traveller, with this favour that is ministered by us, unto the glory of the same Lord, and your willing mind;
20avoiding this, lest any one may blame us in this abundance that is ministered by us,
21providing right things, not only before the Lord, but also before men;
22and we sent with them our brother, whom we proved in many things many times being diligent, and now much more diligent, by the great confidence that is toward you,
23whether--about Titus--my partner and towards you fellow-worker, whether-- our brethren, apostles of assemblies--glory of Christ;
24the shewing therefore of your love, and of our boasting on your behalf, to them shew ye, even in the face of the assemblies.
